README.md, before:

<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line -->
<div align="center">

  <!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line -->
  # Chirpy Jekyll Theme

  A minimal, responsive, and feature-rich Jekyll theme for technical writing.

  [![CI](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/ci.yml?logo=github)][ci]&nbsp;
  [![Codacy Badge](https://img.shields.io/codacy/grade/4e556876a3c54d5e8f2d2857c4f43894?logo=codacy)][codacy]&nbsp;
  [![GitHub license](https://img.shields.io/github/license/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy?color=goldenrod)][license]&nbsp;
  [![Gem Version](https://img.shields.io/gem/v/jekyll-theme-chirpy?&logo=RubyGems&logoColor=ghostwhite&label=gem&color=orange)][gem]&nbsp;
  [![Open in Dev Containers](https://img.shields.io/badge/Dev_Containers-Open-deepskyblue?logo=linuxcontainers)][open-container]

  [**Live Demo** →][demo]

  [![Devices Mockup](https://chirpy-img.netlify.app/commons/devices-mockup.png)][demo]

</div>

## Features

- Dark Theme
- Localized UI language
- Pinned Posts on Home Page
- Hierarchical Categories
- Trending Tags
- Table of Contents
- Last Modified Date
- Syntax Highlighting
- Mathematical Expressions
- Mermaid Diagrams & Flowcharts
- Dark Mode Images
- Embed Media
- Comment Systems
- Built-in Search
- Atom Feeds
- PWA
- Web Analytics
- SEO & Performance Optimization

## Documentation

To learn how to use, develop, and upgrade the project, please refer to the [Wiki][wiki].

## Contributing

Contributions (_pull requests_, _issues_, and _discussions_) are what make the open-source community such an amazing place
to learn, inspire, and create. Any contributions you make are greatly appreciated.
For details, see the "[Contributing Guidelines][contribute-guide]".

## Credits

### Contributors

Thanks to [all the contributors][contributors] involved in the development of the project!

[![all-contributors](https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy&columns=16)][contributors]
<sub> — Made with [contrib.rocks](https://contrib.rocks)</sub>

### Third-Party Assets

This project is built on the [Jekyll][jekyllrb] ecosystem and some [great libraries][lib], and is developed using [VS Code][vscode] as well as tools provided by [JetBrains][jetbrains] under a non-commercial open-source software license.

The avatar and favicon for the project's website are from [ClipartMAX][clipartmax].

## License

This project is published under [MIT License][license].

[gem]: https://rubygems.org/gems/jekyll-theme-chirpy
[ci]: https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/actions/workflows/ci.yml?query=event%3Apush+branch%3Amaster
[codacy]: https://app.codacy.com/gh/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/dashboard?utm_source=gh&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=&utm_campaign=Badge_grade
[license]: https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/blob/master/LICENSE
[open-container]: https://vscode.dev/redirect?url=vscode://ms-vscode-remote.remote-containers/cloneInVolume?url=https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy
[jekyllrb]: https://jekyllrb.com/
[clipartmax]: https://www.clipartmax.com/middle/m2i8b1m2K9Z5m2K9_ant-clipart-childrens-ant-cute/
[demo]: https://cotes2020.github.io/chirpy-demo/
[wiki]: https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/wiki
[contribute-guide]: https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/blob/master/docs/CONTRIBUTING.md
[contributors]: https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/graphs/contributors
[lib]: https://github.com/cotes2020/chirpy-static-assets
[vscode]: https://code.visualstudio.com/
[jetbrains]: https://www.jetbrains.com/?from=jekyll-theme-chirpy

Commit message:

Add tools to convert post for medium

README.md, after:

<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line -->
<div align="center">

  <!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line -->
  # Chirpy Jekyll Theme

  A minimal, responsive, and feature-rich Jekyll theme for technical writing.

  [![CI](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/ci.yml?logo=github)][ci]&nbsp;
  [![Codacy Badge](https://img.shields.io/codacy/grade/4e556876a3c54d5e8f2d2857c4f43894?logo=codacy)][codacy]&nbsp;
  [![GitHub license](https://img.shields.io/github/license/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy?color=goldenrod)][license]&nbsp;
  [![Gem Version](https://img.shields.io/gem/v/jekyll-theme-chirpy?&logo=RubyGems&logoColor=ghostwhite&label=gem&color=orange)][gem]&nbsp;
  [![Open in Dev Containers](https://img.shields.io/badge/Dev_Containers-Open-deepskyblue?logo=linuxcontainers)][open-container]

  [**Live Demo** →][demo]

  [![Devices Mockup](https://chirpy-img.netlify.app/commons/devices-mockup.png)][demo]

</div>

## Features

- Dark Theme
- Localized UI language
- Pinned Posts on Home Page
- Hierarchical Categories
- Trending Tags
- Table of Contents
- Last Modified Date
- Syntax Highlighting
- Mathematical Expressions
- Mermaid Diagrams & Flowcharts
- Dark Mode Images
- Embed Media
- Comment Systems
- Built-in Search
- Atom Feeds
- PWA
- Web Analytics
- SEO & Performance Optimization

## Documentation

To learn how to use, develop, and upgrade the project, please refer to the [Wiki][wiki].

## Contributing

Contributions (_pull requests_, _issues_, and _discussions_) are what make the open-source community such an amazing place
to learn, inspire, and create. Any contributions you make are greatly appreciated.
For details, see the "[Contributing Guidelines][contribute-guide]".

## LaTeX to Medium Converter

This repository includes tools for converting LaTeX-heavy Markdown blog posts for use on Medium in the `convert_to_medium` directory. See [convert_to_medium/README.md](convert_to_medium/README.md) for detailed instructions.

## Credits

### Contributors

Thanks to [all the contributors][contributors] involved in the development of the project!

[![all-contributors](https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy&columns=16)][contributors]
<sub> — Made with [contrib.rocks](https://contrib.rocks)</sub>

### Third-Party Assets

This project is built on the [Jekyll][jekyllrb] ecosystem and some [great libraries][lib], and is developed using [VS Code][vscode] as well as tools provided by [JetBrains][jetbrains] under a non-commercial open-source software license.

The avatar and favicon for the project's website are from [ClipartMAX][clipartmax].

## License

This project is published under [MIT License][license].

[gem]: https://rubygems.org/gems/jekyll-theme-chirpy
[ci]: https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/actions/workflows/ci.yml?query=event%3Apush+branch%3Amaster
[codacy]: https://app.codacy.com/gh/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/dashboard?utm_source=gh&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=&utm_campaign=Badge_grade
[license]: https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/blob/master/LICENSE
[open-container]: https://vscode.dev/redirect?url=vscode://ms-vscode-remote.remote-containers/cloneInVolume?url=https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy
[jekyllrb]: https://jekyllrb.com/
[clipartmax]: https://www.clipartmax.com/middle/m2i8b1m2K9Z5m2K9_ant-clipart-childrens-ant-cute/
[demo]: https://cotes2020.github.io/chirpy-demo/
[wiki]: https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/wiki
[contribute-guide]: https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/blob/master/docs/CONTRIBUTING.md
[contributors]: https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy/graphs/contributors
[lib]: https://github.com/cotes2020/chirpy-static-assets
[vscode]: https://code.visualstudio.com/
[jetbrains]: https://www.jetbrains.com/?from=jekyll-theme-chirpy
